# Neuropathic Pain – A Simple Patient Explainer

Everyone will have experienced some type of pain at least once in their lives. Science and Medicine classify all pain; and therefore, one of these classifications is known as Neuropathic Pain. The primary source for neuropathic pain is through damage or irritation to nerves. Unlike other forms of pain caused by damage to tissues (cuts, bruises, pulled muscles) neuropathic pain develops from a direct injury to your body's nervous system. Symptoms reported by patients suffering from neuropathic pain can vary but may be described as an intense stabbing feeling, burning sensations, a constant buzzing, or even electrical shock-like sensations. Additional reports of neuropathic pain include numbness or a tingling sensation, a loss of sensation to certain areas of the body, or chronic dull aching with no visible evidence of trauma.

You may have heard that the nervous system works somewhat similar to electrical wiring within the human body — transmitting messages between the brain and different parts of the body. This is why we feel things like pressure, heat, or discomfort. When nerve function is disrupted — or there's an aberrant transmission of information — the brain may interpret normal sensations as painful; thus creating a pain that has no apparent damage to the tissue.

So now, you're probably thinking what some of the possible conditions would be that create neuropathic pain? The most common disease worldwide is diabetes, which is a major source of nerve problems in patients with diabetes, particularly in their feet, where they can experience stinging, numbness, etc. Misalignment of the spine can disrupt the normal communication flow between body and brain. A bulging disc (herniation) can put pressure on the nerve(s), resulting in shooting pains radiating down the leg. Nutritional deficiencies such as low levels of Vitamin B-12 are also associated with impaired nerve function. Another condition, which can cause sharp pains along the affected skin area is viral infections such as shingles. Surgical trauma or scarring may also cause this type of pain in rare instances. Lastly, it is occasionally difficult to identify the underlying disease process that is producing the neuropathic pain but if the healthcare provider understands the pattern of pain then he/she will likely be able to categorize the pain as neuropathic.

In addition, neuropathic pain generally does not improve while at rest or when taking over-the-counter pain relievers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen. The reason for this is because paracetamol and ibuprofen are designed to effect inflammation and damage to tissues rather than abnormal neural signals. Therefore, treatment for nerve-related pain typically includes medications that affect nerve activity (some antidepressants, anti-seizure medications, etc.) or topical treatments for the skin. Depending upon what caused the issue, healthcare providers may recommend an exercise program, vitamin therapy, changes in lifestyle habits or other procedures to address the nerves.

A lot of people experience nerve-related pain. They find that some things make their pain worse. Some of these factors could include cold weather, emotional stress, tight clothing, sitting for extended periods of time, lack of sleep and possibly others. Recognizing repeated patterns will allow individuals to discover what is causing their increased discomfort, and therefore they can develop methods to deal with it.

Generally, managing nerve pain requires the implementation of multiple strategies simultaneously, but identifying the source of the problem first will provide a big advantage. For example, if someone has diabetes, controlling his blood sugar levels will likely prevent his nerves from further deteriorating. Mild stretching is also helpful, and paying close attention to your posture is a vital aspect of managing this type of pain (i.e., if the person is experiencing back compression). Applying heat pads, receiving massage or participating in relaxation techniques may also aid in reducing symptoms.

Individuals suffering from neuropathic pain need to understand that this type of pain is real and is not simply imagined or within their minds. Neuropathic pain is a result of nerve issues, but it is a legitimate medical condition and warrants treatment. The earlier an individual receives assistance, the less likely he/she will be to have ongoing difficulties; positive results occur regularly when therapy commences.

If an individual continues to experience burning, shooting, tingling sensations, etc. lasting greater than six-eight weeks, it would be advisable to consult a physician. A doctor may perform tests to locate any nerve issues, and subsequently recommend an appropriate course of treatment.

Although neuropathic pain is extremely difficult to manage, utilizing a combination of treatments (e.g., medication, making a few changes to your daily habits, scheduled visits) will enable the majority of individuals to effectively reduce their pain, while maintaining their ability to engage in normal, day-to-day activities comfortably.

## DISCLAIMER: The information contained in this article is for educational purposes only, and does NOT constitute medical advice. If you are experiencing unpleasant symptoms, or if your symptoms continue, please seek medical attention from a licensed physician.
