# An Overview on HL7

HL7 (Health Level Seven) is one of the core standards used in Healthcare IT (HIT). It is essentially a universal language for exchanging messages between various Hospital Information Systems (HIS). Each Healthcare Organization uses its own systems, for example, systems for registration data (Personal Data), systems for laboratory data (Test Results), systems for Radiology data (Imaging Studies), systems for Pharmacy data (Prescriptions), etc., and the Central Electronic Medical Record System. Because each of these systems encodes and transmits the data differently without a common standard, achieving coordination among systems becomes difficult and the risk of misalignment increases. This problem is solved by HL7, which specifies how patient data should be encoded and transmitted according to a common format, including how the data should be structured and organized.

The above description raises the question: How does a message look in HL7? HL7 messages consist of units known as segments, each segment contains a specific data type. For example, if a patient is admitted or discharged, an ADT (Admission, Discharge and Transfer) message will be generated. The purpose of this message is to notify all integrated systems that the patient's status has changed. Another example would be when medical laboratory testing is completed. An ORU (Observation Result) message is then created and sent back to the EMR (Electronic Medical Record) so the clinician can review the test results. Using standardized message formats for exchange among systems allows for greater consistency in communication among the systems utilizing HL7 thereby reducing error.

This is a major principle in meeting the requirements of Interoperability. Interoperability is defined as the capability of different health information systems to understand and contribute or share information. As a result of using HL7, the number of errors associated with manually entering data into HIS decreases; workflow management for patients improves; and clinicians have immediate and accurate access to clinical reports. While modern standards like FHIR are beginning to be in greater use, the older HL7 infrastructure provides support for basic functions globally in many hospitals when digital records are transferred.
